morning comes and you wake your first
awareness is of boundless misery you
long for some kind of caffeinated
beverage so you can be miserable faster
you exit your place of dwelling and
enter the beverage establishment a few
streets down coffee please you say to
the barista milk or no milk they ask ah
milk please you say colombian or
brazilian beans colombian you say it
really doesn't matter northern or
southern colombia really i i don't mind
i don't mind good choice now beans that
grow at three thousand or four thousand
feet what difference does i don't care i
don't care well there are at least
fifteen thousand growers in that region
i really don't mind would you prefer
your grower likes or dislikes rappers
whose names begin with the prefix lil
what little pump for example
what i don't give a lil yachty
little uzi vert
little chair little table
little dachshund little harpsichord
little tokamak nuclear fusion reactor
well buddhists believe that is the human
condition
sort of a perpetual cycle of chasing
after contentment and ultimately
receiving only dissatisfaction this
dissatisfaction is called dukkha and
this game of rebirthing over and over
into dissatisfaction happens in samsara
which is where we live apparently and
the idea is we stay in samsara living
learning dying being reborn until we
hopefully attain enlightenment but
what's enlightenment how is wisdom
achieved what in the sweet bejesus is
going on with giraffes tongues no but
look at that
and that
and just
it's been a weird year well for all of
that we'll need to talk about the big
man himself
siddhartha gautama who you will surely
recognize from his stage name the buddha
we begin in nepal about two and a half
thousand years ago siddhartha gautama is
born into a cushy royal family and
trying to be nice siddhartha's dad
shields him from the nasty things in
life and keeps him in a massive palace
until at 29 years old on a red jaunt
outside the palace siddhartha notices
people who are like way sick and like
way old and like way dead and realizes
as my climber friends insist on
informing me the universe is a pretty
gnarly place bro so soon after he leaves
his kingdom and sets off in search of a
way to rid the world of suffering it's a
long story but finally siddhartha sits
under a tree determining that he will
not get up again until he has realized
the true nature of mind the demon mara
approaches him and tries to lure
siddhartha away from enlightenment with
distraction and lust but siddhartha is
like i'm busy cheers and indeed becomes
enlightened and attains nirvana nirvana
literally meaning to blow out to
extinguish we'll get to it in a bit but
it was then that siddhartha became the
buddha or literally the awakened one
because he was now free of the three
great poisons delusion greed and hate so
one would imagine he was as my climber
friends like to say pretty stoked bro
and on your marks get set buddhism a
world religion is born oh yeah the
slightly tubby smiling guy you might
have seen little statuettes of yeah
that's probably not the buddha but budai
a 10th century monk he's also thought by
some to be maitreya who's maitreya okay
this gets wiggly so buddhist philosophy
is kinda out there man and while
buddhists don't really have a creation
myth the universe wasn't spoken or
sneezed into being they do have some
fairly trippy ideas about time often in
buddhism and hinduism cosmic duration is
divided into eras called kalpas when
asked how long one type of kalpa was the
buddha allegedly said the length of time
it would take to reduce a mountain 16 by
16 by 60 miles to the size of a seed if
you rubbed it with a silk cloth once a
century so a while now in some
interpretations siddhartha gautama
wasn't the first buddha to turn up there
have apparently been a bunch before and
will apparently be a bunch after and the
next buddha to turn up in our current
era in our current calper ages from now
is supposed to be maitreya represented
here and possibly represented here also
by this gentleman and that's who the
little tubby man is so yeah
yeah yeah
[Music]
after about 45 years of teaching the
buddha died in 483 bce we'll just jump
ahead a bit because i'm bored and two
millennia later and buddhism has
fractured into a bunch of different
schools one is tibetan buddhism and this
next cheerful gentleman is of course the
current dalai lama it's tempting to
think of the dalai lama as the pope of
buddhism and kinder but the real pope
isn't the head of christianity just the
catholic church and the dalai lama isn't
the head of buddhism he's the spiritual
leader of tibetan buddhism dalai lamas
aren't elected they're found when a
dalai lama dies the high lamas leave it
a while then go looking for the child
and the deceased dalai lama has
apparently reincarnated as then once
confirmed the child is taken off to
lhasa the capital of tibet to begin the
process of learning to become the dalai
lama again the first dalai lama was born
about 700 years ago and rose from a poor
child born in a cattle pen to become one
of the most respected teachers in
central asia and is rumored to have
attained buddhahood then did a spot of
the old dying then came dalai lama ii
electric buddhalu at the age of four a
child in the tsang region of tibet
declares mom dad i am in fact the dalai
lama and i'd like to see my monks again
and is confirmed as the first
reincarnation of the dalai lama he has a
good run and dies in meditation at the
age of 67. his reincarnation is found
just a few years later and so on and so
on up until the sixth dalai lama so this
is a weird one due to events to
finickity to go into the sixth
incarnation was recognized as the dalai
lama a bit late around the age of 15. a
few years later though when it got time
to take his full vows he refused and it
was not uncommon to see him staggering
drunk around larsa and visiting brothels
for some scripture and chill maybe he
also wrote some romantic and like kind
of sometimes kinky poetry if i could
meditate as deeply on the sacred texts
as i do on you i would clearly be
enlightened in this lifetime as in
school is cool but baby for you i got it
bad as we discussed tibetan buddhism is
just one branch of many but across all
the various schools of buddhism mahayana
theravada and so on there are some
pillars that are just universally agreed
upon to begin with there are the four
noble truths which are one existing is a
bit crap namely full of dukkha
dissatisfaction to be is to want to want
is to eventually be dissatisfied we
grasp the things monies funnies feline
tummies sometimes we get them then we
just keep grasping for more two the
cause of suffering is craving wanting is
the problem buddhist claim nothing not
mansions not games that aren't buggy on
release can ever be so satisfying they
kill desire desire is the problem
because it never ends three the end of
suffering comes with the end of desire
the end of grasping the end of craving
the way out of the forest of suffering
is not to pound down cheeseburgers and
goldly vodka until every desire is gone
but to extinguish the flame of desire
itself to quote a famous line let go or
be dragged and finally four everything
will apparently be alright if you follow
the eightfold path which is basically
crossfit for buddhists and if i can
think of any theologically appropriate
jokes maybe we'll get to it but time is
short and i'm an alcoholic not an
educator and while we're at it how about
we do the three marks of existence the
three constants of being alive the first
mark of existence is ducker
dissatisfaction but we've done this one
already and i hope you're listening
because there will be a test at the end
the second is anicha or anika basically
impermanence reality according to
buddhism is a transient ever-changing
thing oh you might reply such a
revelation much deep what next fire is
hot blob fish are gross well actually
blobfish aren't gross incidentally thank
you if you keep seeing this image around
that's a blobfish when it's pulled out
of the water normally blobfish prefer to
stay at between two thousand and four
thousand feet in the ocean where they
look like reasonable fish they look like
that because we yank them out of the
water and it's one thing that we have
the audacity to troll them out of the
ocean in the first place but it's quite
another to malign their appearance by
pretending that's what they actually
look like because they don't much like
if a huge hook came down and pulled one
of us into space and aliens just sat
around chuckling at our vacuum frozen
nitrogen swollen corpses going well
humans aren't very pretty after all
anyway chaps how about nanty mata
brewski stop it leave blobfish alone
excuse me reality to our buddhist
friends is a formless swirling dance of
his from the entropic decaying galaxies
to the tide eroded rocks of the beach
all is flux all is changed and you will
die but so will i so it's all right our
inability to accept a nietzsche to
accept that everything is impermanent is
apparently a large source of our dukkha
of our suffering and because we refuse
to accept change we cling to illusions
of permanence we cling to the stories we
tell ourselves about ourselves and to
the fleeting forms of the world and on
that note let me tell you what a
pleasure it is to live in one's third
decade of life when you can still enjoy
not just the persistent facial acne you
thought would go away over a decade ago
but at the very same time begin to
notice gray hairs popping up and say hi
while you stare at yourself helplessly
in the bathroom mirror feeling 19 again
and simultaneously 90 nine
the third mark of existence is called
anata and it's well you know months ago
i came down with the cheeky spot of the
old you-know-what virus i'm fine thanks
for not asking and trapped indoors for
weeks and almost terminally bored i
became quite massively addicted to a
game called town of salem which no one
is paying me to tell you about i just
kind of liked it so very briefly you're
assigned a random role at the beginning
of the game you might be a member of the
town as in the goodies or the baddies
the witch for example basically the card
game mafia anyway you don't have to play
long before you start noticing that
whenever you're assigned as a goodie you
sort of automatically hate the evil
players for being so deceptive and then
again when you're evil you can't stand
all those life-affirming do-gooder
morons and you start to have this
creeping suspicion that quite a lot of
what goes on in our gelatinous meat
computers is kind of context dependent
because just as in the game in life
we're assigned roles we have to play of
course student employee spouse scripted
pretentious know it all online etc and
like in the game sometimes it's hard to
tell where the roles stop and our
genuine personalities begin and the
buddhist answer to this is that it's not
just the world that's impermanent but
ourselves in it our outer identities are
shifting all the time of course and
that's just the external stuff on the
inside of our minds it's even more
mental in watching the interior of one's
own mind it's all sense data and
thoughts irate happy bored excited
whatever but in not one of those
sensations or thoughts will one find an
i a me obviously something is doing the
experiencing but it doesn't appear to
have a middle we can grasp or catch
sight of to bastardize a famous buddhist
story if someone asked you to show them
a plane and you did the ailerons and the
rudder and the engines and they said yes
yes but where's the plane though you'd
think that person was a few fries short
of a happy meal because a plane is just
the sum of its parts it's a bit like
that with us our buddhist friends say
there is no amount of clinging to our
names to our careers to the constant
white noise of nonsense thoughts inside
by which we will catch sight of a
tangible me of an eye and that in a very
botched way is the third mark of
existence anata we're clearly conscious
but our consciousness in buddhism
doesn't have a center not in time not in
mental space our mental selves are
constantly in flux ever-changing ever
impermanent there is a bit of a similar
sentiment in the science-y cosmological
tradition that we are star stuff that
underneath the complex recursive
storytelling machinery of our brains i
am x years old i am x feet high in x
century i am i beneath those stories
there is biology and beneath that is
chemistry and beneath that is a unity of
physics and deep time that everything is
made from we were once these then these
in a while we will be these but we were
always this and will always be this the
idea is that our identities are
incidental and clinging to them over the
majesty of the universe is wicked silly
there is no magical line between baby
and us now that we can point to and say
and then i became me it isn't so much
that we can't step in the same river
twice but with the entire world in flux
with us in flux it's that we can't even
step in the same river once
in the dharmapata the sayings of the
buddha there's the line though one may
conquer a thousand times a thousand men
in battle yet he indeed is the noblest
victor who conquers himself or herself
obviously mastery of the self it's a
neat idea and boy do we seem a long way
off from that one just daily life is
weird enough bound without security lost
without adventure wandering quietly
confused for years through the strange
cityscapes of the 21st century trying to
find yourself in it in any of it trying
to find the naive happiness of childhood
once again and is this what life is now
you think little bursts of euphoria a
few times a year drug induced or chance
induced then back to the uniform grey of
a day you won't remember and if you
should ever stick your head up above the
parapet to ask excuse me is this all
there is then only to be told to shut up
and just get on with it all the while
knowing that a star died to make you and
you no longer find romance in that all
the while being surrounded by miraculous
technology and you no longer find
romance in that the absurd ever drama of
just trying to be okay and the game gets
faster and the game gets harder more
gadgets more screens more patches and
non-stick frying pans and fiber
broadband and ultrasonic
toothbrushes and thank you for your
application but and sorry to hear you're
feeling sad but and we did everything we
could but please god make me a stone i
promised myself i'd be more than this i
promised others i'd be more than this
alive and not quite living deathly not
quite dead and all the while rages the
inner battle the great quiet attempt to
fix oneself and knowing no one else can
do it for you and that battle is hardly
limited to the individual our entire
civilization is engaged in it too on the
28th of january 1986 an o-ring failure
led to the space shuttle challenger
exploding about 72 seconds into launch
killing all seven aboard it was horrific
later news anchor tom brackel would say
of the accident the american public will
be demanding some difficult answers and
of course we'll all have to examine what
it is that we want from this era of high
technology those words were said almost
40 years ago now but they couldn't be
truer still today because it's a fairly
weird age to live in at the moment
watching the human race attempting to
protect itself from itself like a
teenager or mood swings or experimenting
with new ideologies all smashing up
mum's car and refusing to apologize in
the last 30 years about a billion people
have been lifted out of extreme poverty
which is incredible obviously but as it
stands in 2021 currently two in three
humans still live on below ten dollars a
day and one in ten on less than two
dollars a day not to mention the 800
million people who currently don't have
access to safe drinking water plus the
about 14 000 kids under five who are
dying preventable deaths every day all
of which we will all no doubt agree is
and on top of that
about 800 000 people or one copenhagen
take their own lives every year and it's
the 10th leading cause of death in the
u.s alone if there was a day just one
day every century when we all got
together to hash out what our goals
actually are as a species like top five
to do's for homo sapiens in the next
hundred years cheeky trip to nearest
star system it's on there for sure
making it a un human rights violation to
start a tinder conversation with a
single smiley face on the list
definitely but try to make sure
everyone's doing cool and like eating
and stuff no one in their right mind
would put that below number one follow
closely behind by number two when
everyone's eating and stuff let's all
work out how to be happy or at least not
living on the edge of existential
despair yet he indeed is the noblest
victor who conquers himself or rather if
we make it to the distant future where
we have warped drives and free energy or
whatever and at the very same time
hundreds of millions of us are still
living in extreme poverty that isn't
star trek that's blade runner
and except for the flying cars and cool
clothes we really don't want blade
runner the upside of all of this of
course is that it is a choice and human
problems can be solved by human beings
in the words of the much missed david
graber the ultimate hidden truth of the
world is that it is something that we
make and could just as easily make
differently
things could be a whole lot worse
things could be a whole lot better
anyway this has not been an attempt to
convert anyone to buddhism i'm not a
buddhist i'm barely a person but as an
ideology buddhism has in part probably
persisted for over two millennia now
because it points directly to questions
that are just as relevant today as they
were two millennia ago namely how can we
overcome suffering why are we always
fighting our own stupid nature and what
actually are we and the answer to a lot
of that buddhism says rather uniquely is
not up into the big transcendent but
down into the acceptance of the
impermanence of the world and into the
murk of our messy nature that liberation
salvation whatever we call it is waiting
inside the way out is down and as we
head deeper into potentially the most
dangerous century in human history this
battle of trying to regulate our bizarre
prehistoric tendencies might determine
whether we come out the other side of
this century because we're getting
wicked technological but like are we
much wiser for it you probably know the
kardashev scale already it's basically a
litmus test for categorizing how
advanced civilizations could become so a
type 1 civilization could utilize all
the energy available on its home planet
a type 2 civilization all the energy
available in its solar system and a type
3 civilization all the energy available
in its galaxy and that's all well and
good but the kardashev scale measures a
civilization's success by its energy
consumption though we could use another
metric wisdom a type 1 wisdom
civilization could have progressed to a
state where no one goes hungry where no
one needlessly dies of easily curable
diseases and everyone has at least the
same starting conditions universally on
which to try and build a life type 2
might be a civilization where no one has
to involuntarily suffer from physical or
mental maladies from chronic pain from
anxiety etc maybe where we stop
inflicting industrial scale harm on our
animal mates and keeping them in
horrific conditions but rant over i
won't go on about it and type 3 a
civilization where human animal sentient
toaster whatever doesn't have to suffer
at all with disease dead with humankind
finally liberated from the evolutionary
genetic shackles that have been tied
around our legs for millennia and if we
finally arrive at that party at the end
of time as actual adults at last as
technological bodhisattvas as masters of
our own destiny we'll hopefully spend at
least a little while marveling at just
how miraculous it was that we managed to
live through an era in which we could
land robots on other planets and
simultaneously still didn't quite know
how to be happy or properly take care of
all the human family yet and if we make
it to that party together as a species
that would be way cool yo i'm hella
stoked for that yo i trust you are too
yo
but until then
well
until then
so
and until then
and until
[Music]
until then